---
title: FAQ
date: 2018-11-05 23:45:00 -05:00
subtitle: FAQ&#39;s
layout: markdown
class: faq
---

1. **If I have a therapist already, do I have to give up my therapist to come to Wholeview?** Absolutely not!  The psychologists at Wholeview welcome the opportunity to collaborate with outside practitioners whose patients would like to attend Wholeview for specialized treatment while they continue to receive individual therapy, medication or other services from their outside therapist, psychiatrist or physician.

2. **What type of therapy do you offer?** Our team of warm and compassionate therapists have thousands of hours of combined training and clinical experience in multiple evidence-based treatments including Motivational Interviewing, Cognitive Behavioral Therapy, Relapse Prevention, Community Reinforcement Approach, Supportive Expressive Therapy and other therapies.  Our therapists have worked in many different outpatient and inpatients settings including substance abuse treatment programs, detox units, inpatient psychiatric facilities, research settings, and counseling centers.  Each therapist uses his or her extensive experience to tailor treatment to each patient&#39;s individual needs.  You can read more about the therapies we use [here](/why-wholeview/therapies-used/).

3. **Do you accept insurance?** Like many private practitioners in New York City, the psychologists at Wholeview are out of network providers.  That means that we do not accept insurance directly.  However, we will work with you to make the reimbursement process as easy as possible by providing all the necessary paperwork to process your claim through insurance.  We encourage you to call your insurance provider to determine your level of coverage in advance so that there are no surprises.  Once monthly, a statement of services will be provided to you which you can submit along with a health insurance claim form to your insurance company to receive reimbursement.  If there are any questions, you can have your insurance company contact your therapist directly.

4. **Isn&#39;t rehab the best treatment available for alcohol and substance use?** When many people think about alcohol and drug treatment they often immediately think of 30-day rehab.  But the research shows that this isn&#39;t necessarily the best choice.   While some people may need to have a short inpatient stay to gain control and stay safe, many people are able to work on their alcohol and drug use issues while continuing to work and live at home with their families. Also, receiving treatment on an outpatient basis allows people to practice new skills and try new ways of interacting with friends, co-workers and loved ones while receiving support from their therapist and treatment team.

5. **How do I know which Wholeview therapist is right for me?**  Feel free to review our [bios](/about-us/our-staff) and let us know if there is someone you think would be a good match for you.  Or you can call us and we will schedule an intake interview and will match you with a therapist who is a good fit for you based on a thorough assessment of your current needs.

6. **My family member is struggling with alcohol/drugs, but doesn&#39;t want to come to treatment, is there anything I can do?** Yes!  We can help you to motivate your loved one.  We use a treatment called CRAFT, Community Reinforcement Approach and Family Therapy, which is designed specifically for people who are concerned about a loved one who is drinking or using drugs.  This approach will teach you non-confrontational behavioral principles to help your loved one become motivated to enter treatment.  These techniques include finding and rewarding positive behaviors and allowing the loved one to experience the natural consequences of their use. In repeated clinical studies, the CRAFT approach has been proven to be significantly more effective than other approaches which attempt to convince a loved one to enter treatment
